



Macroeconomics: the Market Class
--------------------------------

The modeling framework of ``AgentType`` is called “microeconomic”
because it pertains only to the dynamic optimization problem of
individual agents, treating all inputs of the problem from their
environment as exogenously fixed. In what we label as “macroeconomic”
models, some of the inputs for the microeconomic models are endogenously
determined by the collective states and choices of other agents in the
model. In a rational dynamic general equilibrium, there must be
consistency between agents’ beliefs about these macroeconomic objects,
their individual behavior, and the realizations of the macroeconomic
objects that result from individual choices.

The Market class in ``HARK.core`` provides a framework for such
macroeconomic models, with a ``solve`` method that searches for a
rational dynamic general equilibrium. An instance of ``Market`` includes
a list of ``AgentTypes`` that compose the economy, a method for
transforming microeconomic outcomes (states, controls, and/or shocks)
into macroeconomic outcomes, and a method for interpreting a history or
sequence of macroeconomic outcomes into a new “dynamic rule” for agents
to believe. Agents treat the dynamic rule as an input to their
microeconomic problem, conditioning their optimal policy functions on
it. A dynamic general equilibrium is a fixed point dynamic rule: when
agents act optimally while believing the equilibrium rule, their
individual actions generate a macroeconomic history consistent with the
equilibrium rule.

Down on the Farm
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``Market`` class uses a farming metaphor to conceptualize the
process for generating a history of macroeconomic outcomes in a model.
Suppose all ``AgentTypes`` in the economy believe in some dynamic rule
(i.e. the rule is stored as attributes of each ``AgentType``, which
directly or indirectly enters their dynamic optimization problem), and
that they have each found the solution to their microeconomic model
using their ``solve`` method. Further, the macroeconomic and
microeconomic states have been reset to some initial orientation.

To generate a history of macroeconomic outcomes, the ``Market``
repeatedly loops over the following steps a set number of times:

#. ``sow``: Distribute the macroeconomic state variables to all
   ``AgentTypes`` in the market.

#. ``cultivate``: Each ``AgentType`` executes their ``marketAction``
   method, likely corresponding to simulating one period of the
   microeconomic model.

#. ``reap``: Microeconomic outcomes are gathered from each ``AgentType``
   in the market.

#. ``mill``: Data gathered by ``reap`` is processed into new
   macroeconomic states according to some “aggregate market process”.

#. ``store``: Relevant macroeconomic states are added to a running
   history of outcomes.

This procedure is conducted by the ``makeHistory`` method of ``Market``
as a subroutine of its ``solve`` method. After making histories of the
relevant macroeconomic variables, the market then executes its
``calcDynamics`` function with the macroeconomic history as inputs,
generating a new dynamic rule to distribute to the ``AgentTypes`` in the
market. The process then begins again, with the agents solving their
updated microeconomic models given the new dynamic rule; the ``solve``
loop continues until the “distance” between successive dynamic rules is
sufficiently small.

Summary and Conclusion 
=======================

The HARK project is a modular code library for constructing
microeconomic and macroeconomic models with heterogeneous agents.
Portfolio choice under uncertainty is central to nearly all academic
models, including modern DSGE models (with and without financial
sectors), models of asset pricing (eg. CAPM and C-CAPM), models of
financial frictions (eg. Bernanke et al. 1999), and many more. Under
strict assumptions many of these models can be solved by aggregating
agent decision-making and employing the representative agent. However
when individual agents look very different from one another - for
example, different wealth levels, preferences, or exposures to different
types of shocks - assumptions required for aggregation can quickly fail
and a representative agent is no longer appropriate. Code to solve the
required heterogeneous-agent models tends to be bespoke and
idiosyncratic, often reinvented by different researchers working on
similar problems. This needless code duplication increases the chance
for errors and wastes valuable researcher time.

Researchers should spend their valuable time producing research, not
reinventing wheels. The HARK toolkit already provides a useful set of
industrial strength, reliable, reusable wheels, constructed using a
simple and easily extensible framework with clear documentation,
testing, and estimation frameworks. The longer-term goals of the
Econ-ARK project are to create a collaborative codebase that can serve
the entire discipline of economics, employing the best of modern
software development tools to accelerate understanding and
implementation of cutting edge research tools. The solution methods
employed in HARK are not the only methods available, and those who have
additional methodological suggestions are strongly encouraged to
contribute! Increasing returns to production is one of the few
“non-dismal” possibilities in economic thought – we hope to capture this
feature of code production in the HARK framework. Key next steps include
finalizing the general-equilibrium HARK modules, identifying additional
baseline models to replicate in HARK, and encouraging a new generation
of students to learn from, use, and contribute to the collaborative
construction of heterogeneous-agent models.

Bibliography
============

Adjemian, Stéphane, Houtan Bastani, Michel Juillard, Ferhat Mihoubi,
George Perendia, Marco Ratto, and Sébastien Villemot. 2011. “Dynare:
Reference Manual, Version 4.” Dynare working papers 1, CEPREMAP.

Aruoba, S Borağan, and Jesús Fernández-Villaverde. 2015. “A Comparison
of Programming Languages in Macroeconomics.” *Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control* 58. Elsevier: 265–73.

Carroll, Christopher D. 2012. “Implications of Wealth Heterogeneity for
Macroeconomics.” *Johns Hopkins University Department of Economics
Working Paper*, no. 597.

———. 2014a. “Representing Consumption and Saving Without a
Representative Consumer.” In *Measuring Economic Sustainability and
Progress*, 115–34. University of Chicago Press.

———. 2017. “Monetary Policy According to HANK.” In *American Economic
Review*, 697-743.

———. 2014b. “Heterogeneous Agent Macroeconomics: An Example and an
Agenda.” Washington, D.C.: Presentation at IMF Workshop on Computational
Macroeconomics.

Carroll, Christopher, Alexander Kaufman, David Low, Nathan Palmer, and
Matthew White. 2017. “A User’s Guide for Hark: Heterogeneous Agents
Resources and toolKit.”
https://github.com/econ-ark/HARK/blob/master/Documentation/HARKmanual.pdf:
Econ ARK.

Carroll, Christopher, Jiri Slacalek, Kiichi Tokuoka, and Matthew N
White. 2017. “The Distribution of Wealth and the Marginal Propensity to
Consume.” *Quantitative Economics* 8 (3). Wiley Online Library:
977–1020.

Chacon, Scott, and Ben Straub. 2014. *Pro Git*. Apress.

Geanakoplos, John. 2010. “The Leverage Cycle.” *NBER Macroeconomics
Annual* 24 (1). The University of Chicago Press: 1–66.

Geanakoplos, John, Robert Axtell, J Doyne Farmer, Peter Howitt, Benjamin
Conlee, Jonathan Goldstein, Matthew Hendrey, Nathan M Palmer, and
Chun-Yi Yang. 2012. “Getting at Systemic Risk via an Agent-Based Model
of the Housing Market.” *American Economic Review* 102 (3): 53–58.

Ram, Yoav, and Lilach Hadany. 2015. “The Probability of Improvement in
Fisher’s Geometric Model: A Probabilistic Approach.” *Theoretical
Population Biology* 99. Elsevier: 1–6.

Sheppard, Kevin. 2018. “Introduction to Python for Econometrics,
Statistics and Numerical Analysis.” *Lecture Notes, University of
Oxford*. https://www.kevinsheppard.com/Python_for_Econometrics.



