.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

National Advancement of Data Science Education
==============================================

Anthony Suen, Alan Liang and Amal Bhatnagar

Data science is a burgeoning field that is quickly being adopted across
all domains and sectors. Data Science education initiatives have been
growing rapidly, but also largely simultaneous and in an uncoordinated
manner. Programs are often developed and implemented in silos, often
leading to duplications of efforts and differences in pedagogical
approaches and course quality. Furthermore, while a number of curriculum
guidelines for degrees in data science have been proposed, opportunities
for engaging in pedagogical exchanges and sharing resources remain rare.
Without a common knowledge base of resources and platform for
undergraduate support, many institutions have encountered difficulties
in setting up data science curricula, specifically pedagogical and
infrastructural barriers. Additionally, data science education in many
universities has been focused on graduate programs, with very few
undergraduate ones in place.

Stakeholders around the country previously identified the necessity of
gathering data science enthusiasts and discussing its implementation in
institutions. The importance of defining data science curriculum
guidelines has been the subject of numerous workshop and meetings such
as the “Workshop on Theoretical Foundations of Data Science,” “The Park
City Math Institute 2016 Summer Undergraduate Faculty Program,” and
“Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate
Perspective.” While these workshops produced comprehensive guidelines on
the structure of the programs, the actual content and teaching
modalities remain unclear.

On July 16th-July 19th 2018, the Division of Data Sciences at the UC
Berkeley hosted a Workshop on Undergraduate Data Science Pedagogy and
Practice. As a pioneer in undergraduate data science education, UC
Berkeley has developed a comprehensive set of open-license and
open-source resources that range from teaching materials and curriculum
to its system infrastructure and share them at the workshop. With
support from the NSF, the Berkeley organizers put out a call for
interested professors and instructors across the country 41 instructors
from a variety of higher-education institutions that hugely vary in
terms of size, location, and experience with data science education.

The workshop sought to 1) Examine the *Foundations of Data Science (Data
8)* course, and discuss the course content and pedagogical methods
employed behind this innovative and accessible curriculum, 2) Build a
national community of practice around undergraduate Data Science
education, 3) Showcase the infrastructural platform that Berkeley has
developed for its courses that involve data science, and empower
participants to use its many open-source components and 4) Engage
workshop participants to identify challenges and needs for moving Data
Science education forward at their institutions participants
collaborated to develop a common vision for expanding and moving forward
the cause of Data Science Pedagogy nationally. These four items were
broken down core topics including *1)* **Integrating and Serving across
Disciplines using Computation** *can be used and applied in various
disciplinary fields past the scope of that from a traditional computer
science or statistics faculty 2)* **Educational Cyber-Infrastructure**
*looks into the technical resources and human support needed for running
data science courses, the financial and technical barriers many
institutions face from implementing such an infrastructure, and the
possible solution of generating a regional or nationwide educational
cyber-infrastructure for sustainable and scalable benefits*. *3)*
**Integrating Modular DS content into teaching including Ethical
Content** *properly integrate discussions and critical thinking about
ethics into data science courses, and how such an integration could
result in new courses that will better complement the overall scope of
the educational field.*

1) **Integrating and Serving across Disciplines using Computation**
-------------------------------------------------------------------

*Create a space for Data Science to exist as a cross-campus endeavor and
engage faculty in different departments.*

Within higher education, data science can touch all different genres and
disciplines of academia. The proliferation of affordable computational
capacity, migration of publishing channels to the internet, advanced
sensing technology, and other data collection methods has led to the
possibility of data science in almost every area of scientific endeavor.
Current examples of data science being integrated into other disciplines
include randomized controlled trials in Development Economics published
through open data repositories and the integration between law and data
technologies.

The first step toward creating a successful Data Science program within
an institution comes from the successful implementation of an
introductory-level data science course, as utilization existing
introductory computer science and statistics courses in place of a
foundational data science course slows students learning and limits the
audience. Additionally, having a course that focuses on relevant data
science techniques allows students to focus on industry-level and
research-level concepts that would be useful to them in their
professional lives. Such a course also allows students to explore the
realm of data science at an introductory level, so they can understand
the basic concepts without getting lost in the more complex ones. This
introductory data science course specifically helps students start to
ask questions and think like a data scientist. By having a campus-wide
introductory data science course available to students of all academic
disciplines, students are exposed to a growing field relevant to their
disciplines and majors.

The university community can benefit by data science bridging multiple
disciplines and introducing these programming techniques and other
quantitative tools from statistics and mathematics within the context of
rich applications drawn from a variety of disciplines. Applications of
data science have created opportunities to teach students programming,
statistical techniques, and other computational methodologies earlier in
their academic careers to expand the academic possibilities within their
chosen area of focus. Exposure to such subjects will allow students to
become clearer thinkers and problem solvers in their home disciplines
through their knowledge and training in computational work with real
data. Data science is not just a service course, as the emerging
challenges of data usage in applied disciplines can set the agenda for
data science within computer science and statistics. In undergraduate
education, a broad student population learning data science can benefit
students operating outside of the specific data science domain, while
the data science field can attract bright minds with interesting
questions.

As for its implementation, Computer Science and Statistics fields may be
a traditional base but the core foundational facilitators must find
connections to other departments and stakeholders. In fielding an
entry-level data science course and fitting it into the curriculum, it’s
crucial to engage with faculty across a variety of disciplines in an
inclusive, supportive way and a spirit of partnership. A full
implementation will involve enriching the teaching of the entry-level
course, injecting computational content into existing courses, and
helping to reframe methods courses within the disciplines so they can
build off of integrative interdisciplinary general training in data
science.

The Data Science students having classes from a field of application
will create a space to apply methods learned in their core classes, and
opportunities to learn theoretical methods that Data Science may be
lacking. Having other departments engage with a Data Science major or
minor will give those departments a way to grow their offerings and
create possibilities for curricular innovation. The Berkeley model
provided a number of illustrations of cross-campus collaboration
including introductory Data Science course is accompanied by a series of
smaller, applied “Connector” courses which give students a flavor of how
data science may be carried out within a given domain. The Data Science
student teams have also supported the creation of data science content
for inserting in other type of (usually non data science) courses in
self-contained “Modules” that can illustration aspects of data science
to a different audience. The Berkeley Data Science program has also
undertaken a series of summer “bootcamp” style workshops open to all
faculty to encourage faculty to engage and innovate their curriculum.
Finally, at a research university such as Berkeley, there has been
considerable success due to graduate students or postdocs, who may be
leading the way for faculty, in adapting new data science methods to
different disciplines.

2) Common Educational Cyber-Infrastructure
------------------------------------------

Implementation of a data science course in a scalable way requires
universities and institutions to develop capacity in on-demand
cyber-infrastructure to support their educational goals. Local
computation is not ideal, as it is harder to manage when the number of
students increases. Additionally, as the number of courses that require
such infrastructure increases, local computation would become too time
consuming. For many small institutions and universities, this proves a
difficult task that can be a barrier to innovation in curriculum and
course delivery. As a result, development of regional or national cloud
based computing solutions that can serve array individual educational
institutions is needed.

*Fund and pilot a regional or national data science hub for education
that will expand access and encourage innovation in data science
education.*

Educational cyber-infrastructure is different than research
cyber-infrastructure due to differences in its goals, resource needs,
deployment timelines, cost and pricing of models, and broad access
mandate. Educational infrastructure is deployed for a relatively low
resource use by a large number of relatively unsophisticated users.
Making the infrastructure accessible means making it easy to use both by
instructors and students, and potentially integrating it into existing
campus Learning Management Systems (LMS), eg Canvas. For institutions
teaching data science courses, the infrastructure is crucial for
creating and deploying data science homework and lab assignments. Having
this educational cyber-infrastructure is more efficient than local
infrastructure, as instructors can teach students from all around the
world and the system holds all the necessary material. It also makes
teaching data management and analysis and allowing the ability to have
instructors illustrate the visualization of data easier.

However, the adoption costs of cyber-infrastructure is high and
problematic, especially for smaller institutions. While the component
cost for hardware and software are going down through virtualization
(cloud), human talent is hard to acquire. For many institutions, the
ability to setup the necessary support systems for JupyterHub or other
infrastructure is beyond the expertise of a single course instructor.
Even qualified instructors may not have the capacity to take on such a
task, as their time is required for equally important tasks of planning
lesson outlines and curriculum. Institutional IT staff members would
also be required to go through additional training if they were assigned
the task, and the trainings required would vary across institutions to
better fit the differing needs and implementations of the data science
courses. Thus overall startup costs are expensive, and the long term
sustainability for maintaining a educational cyber-infrastructure would
come with too many question marks for many institutions faculty to make
implementation a priority.

Autograding is essential to the scalability of data science education
and alleviates substantial work for large classes at UC Berkeley, such
as *Data 8:* *Foundations of Data Science* and *Data 8X*, its massive
open online course, or MOOC, version, which see more than 1,500 students
per semester and 75,000 students enrolled respectively. Currently, UC
Berkeley uses various grading systems even within its own data science
courses. *Data 8* utilizes ok.py, a Berkeley developed solution that has
a plethora of features for large and diverse classes. However, this
comes with a complexity cost for instructors who only need a subset of
these features and sysadmins operating an okpy server installation. On
the other hand, Data 100, the upper division core data science course,
utilizes *nbgrader*, an open source grading solution built for Jupyter
Notebooks. On Data 8X, the newly developed *gofer grader* is used to
solely address the needs of a MOOC course and retains similar aspects
from Data 8’s grading system.

Creating a national educational cyber-infrastructure allowing
participation from all institutions and universities can solve the
problem of high individual institution startup costs in infrastructure.
We believe that the best way to accomplish this is to would be to work
with the existing regional Big Data Hubs, which may have access to cloud
resources, and host partners and expertise. To maximize learning within
the pilot, local staff at a given institution would need to be trained
and partake in the beta testing of such a system to document problems
and best practices. Successful implementation of data science courses
across certain locations might lead to partnerships across and within
institutions, allowing for successful techniques to be communicated
across all partners and similar curriculum modeling to exist for
consistency.

The successful formation of a national educational cyber-infrastructure
will allow for data science courses to be supported at institutions and
universities under a cost efficient structure. Stakeholders would no
longer need to implement their own system, but instead could go through
training and onboarding for a national system that will be easy to use
and consistent between institutions. If such a process could be
undertaken, the ability to host data science courses for undergraduate
university-level student will be readily accessible to schools.

**3) Guidelines for Creating and Incorporating Modular DS Content
(condense into across domain portions)**

There are two main concerns when modularizing data science content:
*Having just one introductory data science class is not enough to
warrant an entire data science curricula, and creating a sustainable
model that supports the data science curricula.*

Implementation and integrating the new course to fit in the overall
academic curriculum is key for a seamless student experience. Because
data science serves functions in a vast array of interdisciplinary
fields of study, the ability to modify the introductory course and
tailor it to fit in with the current institution curriculum will go a
long way in communicating the relevance of the study to students taking
the course. This process will need time for planning and preparation
before the actual steps for integration can start. In addition, a useful
step in this process would be to form arrangements with faculty from
different departments to see if there exists a possibility of connector
courses or incorporation of data science into other subjects. Connector
courses are supplemental courses which build on the introductory data
science course by using similar statistical and computational
techniques, but in different disciplines, such as business, economics,
and geography. Finally, there are many places where the class will be
fitting in as a prerequisite, or satisfying a requirement, for different
campus departments, and these will have to be finessed with each
department. It may be necessary to navigate between faculty offering
related courses, using other programming languages, and departments
which operate in areas similar to that of the subject. In order to
alleviate the burden of redistributing finances and increase funding,
faculty might have to reallocate their time to develop and adopt new
curriculum. Hires for these positions could come from graduate students,
institution volunteers, and even renowned academics.

In order to successfully adopt a data science curricula, we propose
creating a platform to share teaching resources that is available to
anyone in the community. Such a platform could be modeled on the popular
Data8 public organization (https://github.com/data-8) and the site
hosting Data Carpentry lessons (https://datacarpentry.org/lessons/). The
principal functions of this platform will be to share teaching resources
such as use cases (dataset and accompanying analyses), open source
textbooks or modules, as well as programs used to facilitate data
science education. The platform will be inclusive, with contribution and
usage open to anyone in the community. There will be a dissemination of
use cases, including exercises, activities, and examples sorted by
topic/domain that simplify inclusion of relevant and useful examples in
new or existing courses. This repository would include canonical
examples, such as the Iris and Mauna Loa CO2 data sets commonly used to
illustrate classification and time series analysis, and other examples
from local industry or research projects. The design of the courses and
the planning of the material and activities is key, as highlighted by UC
Berkeley’s Data Science Pedagogy and Practice. Berkeley’s Data 8’s
success in reaching up to 1,500 students within its first few iterations
attests to the importance of curriculum innovation and pedagogical
methods. Having staff with technical skills to support the computer
infrastructure and support by collaboration with nearby/ sister
institutions who can share best practices and resources makes this model
even more successful. Developing collaborative, modularized open-source
teaching materials, such as the books used in Data 8 and Data 100,
allows other institutions to more easily implement curricula for
themselves. Modularizing textbooks into a catalog of chapters can be
independently maintained to satisfy different pedagogical scenarios or
requirements.

As data come to structure more and more aspects of our lives, the
potential impact of data science on individuals and societies looms ever
larger. For this reason, it is critical that data scientists understand
the social worlds from which their data are drawn and in which their
science intervenes. They must be trained to recognize the ethical
implications of their work and act accordingly. The ethics of data
science are social, individual, and contextual rather than linear.
Ethical content can be incorporated into data science curricula both by
integrating ethical topics into existing data science courses and by
including ethically-focused courses to data science degree programs. The
first approach may be better suited to the ethical questions that
individual data scientists encounter in their daily work, while the
second may be better suited to the broader issues raised by the growing
role of data and algorithms in society as a whole. For example, ethical
questions arise at every step of the data science life cycle. Where data
science courses teach professional competencies of statistics, computer
science, and various content areas, they can also introduce students to
the ethical standards of research and practice in those domains
(National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 2018). Some
data science textbooks already address such issues as misleading data
visualizations, p-hacking, web scraping, and data privacy (Baumer,
Kaplan, and Horton 2017).

Databases and algorithms are socio technical objects; they emerge and
evolve in tandem with the societies in which they operate (Latour 1990).
Understanding data science in this way and recognizing its social
implications requires a different kind of critical thinking than is
taught in data science courses. Issues such as computational agency
(Tufekci 2015), the politics of data classification and statistical
inference (Bowker and Star 2000; Desrosières 1998), and the perpetuation
of social injustice through algorithmic decision making (Eubanks 2018;
Noble 2018; O’Neill 2016) are well known to scholars in the
interdisciplinary field of science and technology studies (STS), who
should be invited to participate in the development of data science
curricula. STS or other courses in the social sciences and humanities
dealing specifically with topics related to data science may be included
in data science programs.

Including training in ethical considerations at all levels of society
and all steps of the data science workflow in undergraduate data science
curricula could play an important role in stimulating change in industry
as our students enter the workforce, perhaps encouraging companies to
add ethical standards to their mission statements or to hire chief
ethics officers to oversee not only day-to-day operations but also the
larger social consequences of their work.

I. **Summary & Vision**

In summary the conference participants set up a course of work to
develop data science education and a pathway forwards. The specific
proposals are:

1. *Create a space for Data Science to exist as a cross-campus endeavor
   and engage faculty in different departments.*

2. *Fund and pilot a regional or national data science hub for education
   that will expand access and encourage innovation in data science
   education.*

3. *Centralized platform of resources for enhancing collaborating around
   teaching data science*

Our three-pronged strategy involving creating a foundational course,
necessary and scalable infrastructure, and modularized content with
feasible replicability pivots institutions to establish sustainable data
science curricula. Having an open-source platform would democratize
access to resources for creating such data science curricula and course
content.

We envision a world where students serve as clear thinkers who learn
ethical data-driven techniques regardless of their domain of expertise
and can manipulate data to find better solutions to problems.
Institutions would integrate data science techniques on campus and
collaborate with other facilities across the country on a centralized
platform with resources. They would adopt these resources and
personalize them on their own curriculums to help their students. A
national data science hub for education would bring together these
institutions and innovate the data science education. Universities would
encourage students to use such data-driven methodologies not just in an
institutional setting but also in their professional careers afterwards.
We believe our methodology will guide our commitment to work together,
structure our cross-campus collaboration, and target grant writing to
support these initiatives.

\ **Works Cited**

Baumer, Benjamin S., Daniel T. Kaplan, and Nicholas J. Horton. 2017.
*Modern Data Science with R*. Chapman & Hall.
`*http://mdsr-book.github.io* <http://mdsr-book.github.io>`__

Bowker, Geoffrey C. and Susan Leigh Star. 2000. *Sorting Things Out:
Classification and Its Consequences*. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Desrosières, Alain. 1998. *The Politics of Large Numbers: A History of
Statistical Reasoning*. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Eubanks, Virginia. 2018. *Automating Inequality: How High-Tech Tools
Profile, Police, and Punish the Poor*. New York: St. Martin’s.

Hacking, Ian. 1996. Normal People. Pp. 59-71 in David Olson and Nancy
Torrance, eds., *Modes of Thought: Explorations in Culture and
Cognitions*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Hicks, Marie. 2017. *Programmed Inequality: How Britain Discarded Women
Technologists and Lost its Edge in Computing*. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Latour, Bruno. 1990. Technology is society made durable. *The
Sociological Review* 38(1, supplement): 103-131.

Light, Jennifer S. 1999. When computers were women. *Technology and
Culture* 40(3): 455-483.
`*https://www.jstor.org/stable/25147356* <https://www.jstor.org/stable/25147356>`__

MacKenzie, Donald A. 1981. *Statistics in Britain: 1865-1930; The Social
Construction of Scientific Knowledge*. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press.

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2018. *Data
Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and Options*. Washington, DC:
The National Academies Press.
`*https://doi.org/10.17226/25104* <https://doi.org/10.17226/25104>`__

Noble, Safiya Umoja. 2018. *Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines
Reinforce Racism*. New York: New York University Press.

O’Neill, Cathy. 2016. *Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big Data
Increases Inequality and Threatens Democracy*. New York: Crown.

Tufekci, Zeynep. 2015. Algorithmic harms beyond Facebook and Google:
Emergent challenges of computational agency. *Colorado Technology Law
Journal* 13(2): 203-218.
